So I'm gonna cover one more thing that
I think is pretty fun which is Enums.
Now you're probably thinking
Enums those are fairly boring,
well rust makes them way more fun,
in fact it's so much fun that it did
actually change you can do just
the greatest things in the universe.
And it's really why rust has become my
personal like my favourite language is
because of this one concept right here,
and
also the awesome libraries and
other things.
So first we're gonna go through and I'll
just show them in all three languages.
Go having the least
awesome Enum support and
rust having the most
awesomeness Enum support.
So let's go back to my TS file,
what did I call it?
TS, Yeah.
All right.
And so, for this one,
this is TypeScript TS Enum, right.
Don't do that you only do that with types.
And so I can have like foo,
bar and baz right?
And of course, it has a concrete
value to when it's compiled.
I assume it becomes a two and
TypeScript land.
I only assume that I
don't actually know that.
But I assume they do things to
make it very, very nice, right?
So this, this all makes sense.
I assume everybody understands the Enums.
Okay, awesome.
All right, and I'm gonna,
let's go to go for just a second.
Even though I think this it just makes me
a little bit sad about their Enum support.
So I'm gonna just create a main dot go.
You always have to go package main,
cannot do that func main.
Also just quick side note rust and go have
a main function whereas TypeScript has
just a main file so, if you ever see
why have main functions on rust but
not on TypeScript good speakers well,
they don't have an entry point the same.
All right?
So anyways, we take this and
we can go like this type,
we'll call it GoEnum is an int, and
then I can give it the old const
to I know this is gonna be great.
Foo is a GoEnum iota.
You're thinking iota what a great name?
Iota is just this auto incrementing item.
This is how you specify it.
I know it's absolutely ridiculous.
But as you can see,
it's an int value two just like
the other one was an anti value two.
Okay, we're gonna, use an Enum and Go
when we're building the CLI application.
But it just emotionally hurts me
that this is what they gave us.
But that's okay.
Enums aren't a huge part of programming.
I don't think anyone's like to
upset about it except for me.
So let's go back here.
I'm gonna copy this TSC Enum, and
I'm going to go to that main RS file.
And we're gonna just
paste it right in here.
And I'm gonna call it Rs.
There you go look at RSENums.
How great is that?
All right, so
they're pretty much identical to
TypeScript at this current point.
But they get a lot better.
They get so much better.
So I don't want to ruin it.
And I know I've already
skipped ahead a little bit.
You could also assign values, right?
Foo equals 123, if you didn't want that,
you can also use strings in TypeScript
if you really, really want it to Go,
ridiculous, now rust it's awesome,
ours is TypeScript see I already pre
planned all these great jokes and
observations I was making,
it's like I've done this before.
All right, so why go over enums?
They're very very simple, but
this is where it gets awesome you
can add types to Enums in rust.
Now yeah, I don't want I
don't want to look at it yet.
Okay, so let's,
let's just add some types here.
Are you ready for this?
Okay, I see everyone's ready for it.
All right, so I'm gonna add an i32 right?
So that's just an integer.
Now notice something right away.
Did I specify type on bar?
No.
Did I specify one on bass?
But I did put one here on Foo,
let's go even further.
I'm gonna put this one as a string,
you don't have to have
the same types on the Enums.
So they call this a some type I believe
is the functional properness of it,
I don't wear tie dye t-shirts.
So I am not the best
functional person out there,
my neck beard just never seems to come in,
but
I hear these are called Functional Tests
sorts of stuff here right?
And this allows you to create things
that are very hard in traditional
typed languages, very obvious
example is heterogenous list, right?
A list that contains, okay, first item
is NRA, the second item is a string,
the third item is a number, that's very
easy in JavaScript planned that's very,
very hard and most typed languages,
because those aren't there.
They're like non overlapping
values at all right?
Once a string ones a number you don't,
they just don't overlap.
Whereas with rust,
I can create a vector of this RSEnum, and
now I have a list that can be
contained of strings of sub vectors.
I have I 30 twos and it becomes this
really kind of I what I think is a pretty
powerful construct right here.
So I love this.
I just think this is
the greatest thing ever.
And at first this doesn't seem
like it's that big of a deal, but
man, you can make some pretty
awesome stuff with this.
And it's always been the thing that
I hate the most about type languages.
And so there we go, let's see,
where did I wanna go with this?
Just so I know what I wanna do.
All right, yeah,
we can I can even show you how to here.
Well do a little example
of using them too.
So I'll go like this
let Foo equals RSEnum,
and then I can create a Foo and
give it the number five.
All right, so
how do I get that number five out of here?
Well, there's a couple things I can do.
The first thing I can do is I
can do an if statement, right?
So I can go if, let, now this is what
what is referred to as pattern matching.
If foo value equals foo, right?
So I literally am pattern matching this if
statement creating a variable on the if
statement.
So if Foo is an is a subtype of
Foo I plucked out the value.
So when I look at this type,
it's an RSEnum,
when I look at the value
right here it is an i32.
So I've actually plucked out the value.
You can do the same thing in a less
kind of specific context you can do
something called a match.
So this also does pattern matching,
which pattern matching is pretty awesome.
One thing that's super cool about it,
is that it can tell you right away,
you have a non exhaustive pattern match.
So if you're trying to match
on all the different values,
rust can right away tell you hey,
you haven't done everything yet.
You need to go and
make sure that this thing is working.
You can't even compile this
program when it's not like that.
So then I can put in Foo, and
I can put in the value and
now I have access,
to the value of RSEnum right?
And so now I have access to that value,
but of course it's still telling me hey
you're still missing bar and baz and so if
I were to do pattern matching I'd actually
have to do the whole nine yards for
each one of them.
You can also cheat and do this which
I think probably isn't the best
practice because if you add a new value or
a new type to your Enum this
won't let you know that you haven't
covered it in all the other cases.
And so, it can be dangerous to use that.
But nonetheless, this is super cool or
at least I think pattern matching
is like that's pretty magical, and
it can even keep on going pretty deep, you
can keep on matching further and further.
So if I had say Foo 2 that is an option,
which is another option's
just another Enum.
It's a generic Enum, meaning that you
provide, it's the type you want it to be.
And that's the type it is.
I can now jump in here and go Foo2, and
then I can even grab out
the options some type.
And then grab the value from that so now
I'm handling the specific case of my Enum
that is a Foo2 that has the inside type
that is a specific value of some, right?
Which me means I can also
handle the other case of none,
which is the other value of a option.
So options we'll go over
options in just one second but
as you can see I can keep on
pattern matching deeper and
deeper so if your types are super huge
You can pattern match unlimitedly, right?
And this thing will let you know,
what cases you've missed.
So one more thing, and
then I'll answer that question.
If you look right here,
it's letting me know that I'm missing
some things that need to be covered.
Which I think it's pretty radical,
that it can tell these things.
So, all right, Question?
>> Can you Enum functions?
>> I think I wonder if he can I've
never tried that let's let's just try
a Well, it kind of seems like it
will kind of looks like he can.
So I've never tried throwing
in one of these but let's see,
a bar and
I'm gonna return an i32 return five,
that's an ampersand sign, and
three up and let's just pass in bar.
What is value?
Is a function and hey,
look at that it works.
That's kind of a fun idea.
Never thought about joining that up.
Also, one thing I really do like
is that the function syntax,
matches function syntax, TypeScript,
it's like, you can create a function.
But if you want to say it as what
it's just like slightly off.
And it's kinda bothersome.
For those that don't know what I'm saying,
is that if you wanted to create a type it
would be this and
then this is the return value, right?
That it's not that's not quite
how you specify a function.
That's how you inline a function.
So it's like a little bit of a I'm
sorry it's just such a pedantic point,
I'm sure nobody actually cares,
I care deeply though so
there you go so yes so you can these
are pretty advanced types, right?
So this thing could be something
that could return another RSEnum,
the mind is being blown right here right?
So you can create some fun stuff.
So why don't I show you Enums right,
a, pretty cool right but, b,
there's more to it.
There's actually a very specific reason so
here skip through all
this we've already talked about that,
so we can also do generics on him right?
So I can say Enum foo,
has the generic type t, and
it's only member bar has a subtype t,
right?
Anyway, so you can see.
And that means you can also
have multiple values, right?
I could have t and v and have two
different subtypes with those, each one so
that way on the outside I can
specify what types I want,
than the Enums just
naturally work that way.
Fantastic, right?
So how's this practically useful?
Well, it lists with many types we already
talked about that heterogeneous list and
Enums beautiful, right?
But more so nullable and error handling.
So let me show you what
I mean by Nullable.
So I'm just gonna program this up really
quickly I always like programming
things more than I do like that, I just
like programming them more than just
simply showing them on a whiteboard so
if I do it like this type Foo and
it has some type bar and
this thing is potensly string, right?
It might be a string so
what actually is bar?
If I had a function
called do something and
inside of do something I take a foo,
right?
And let's just say I return a boolean.
Don't get your languages mixed up.
I could do something like if foo.bar.
Do something right here, right?
We'll just return true.
Yeah, don't ever do this
kind of programming.
You should just not do that.
Else, you could have other things in here,
right?
And then return false right?
So there you go, we have this beautiful,
nice thing that does
one thing on one side.
And the reason why that is is because
bar actually has two types, right?
It has the type of undefined,
and it has the type of string.
So you get two for the price of one.
Now, most people feel like
this is really great.
I actually think this is kind of crappy.
And there's good reasons why I
think this is kind of crappy.
It's just that you always find
yourself doing all these checks, and
it can be a bit painful.
And the reality is life is a little
bit worse than your types and so
sometimes your types are actually
undefined, then you have to go back and
find out what the heck happened because
people don't keep up the contracts
bla bla bla bla It can
be a little bit rough.
Rust takes a different kind
of approach to this so
I kind of alluded to it right here
it's called an option type, and
to make sure that I'm actually on board
with this let's go right here, so
here we go this is what is referred to as
the Nullable in rust, it is an Enum called
an option, it has a generic parameter t
and it has the none and it has a sum.
And the sum obviously has the generic
type, as its type that it has underneath.
So it's the exact same thing as that
question mark operator effectively
either there's nothing there or
there's something there.
But it's a little bit more fun than that,
so let's let's actually do that really
quickly so I'm gonna just take
this away take that away and
let's go like this let
foo equals some five.
So just like Enums, we can do this, so
one nice thing about options is that
it actually in lines the types right here,
so notice that I don't have to
say option colon colon some, I can
just say some because it's such a used
Enum there just gonna make a kind
of like a first class citizen.
So you just have this nice little
reference right here, so I have some.
All right that means I can do
this exact same if let some,
so I go if let some you know value equals
foo and what do I get out of here?
I get out and i32 exact same thing.
I can pattern match my way through via
either the match or an if statement so
I can do some value here and do stuff here
or the nun case and do it right here.
So it's a bit more explicit it kind of
makes you always program those things
in but there's more.
There's actually what I consider
more awesome ways to handle options,
is that I can also like this,
foo.map, right?
And in here,
let's just have our variable x.
By the way this is a closure.
This is equivalent to, so
a foo.map if we can do this in TypeScript,
these two statements would
be equivalent right?
One just uses two bars and no fat arrow,
pretty much the same thing right?
And so as you can see I can actually do
something only when there's a value which
also makes it really awesome which we'll
see here shortly using these things with
iterators because we can use a flat map.
Flat maps are just they're beautiful
constructs we'll see here in a moment but
this is pretty dang cool, right?
So now you can actually use
these dot maps, and for
the first three months of using rust,
I never used the dot map on options.
But it's actually quite fantastic
once you start using it what you can
do with options in the dot map,
it also has a filter.
So if it is a value,
you only want some of those values, right?
So you can imagine a situation
where you have a Nullable type.
And you only wants some set
of values less than 10.
I can put in here as long as x
is less than 10 as my beautiful
little item here, my goodness.
If you look at this, whenever you do
filters, it's always a reference.
So you can do one of two things.
You can do a little dereference here.
You can make this into a reference or you
can pattern match away the reference and
now it's an i32.
Don't worry about, those are just all
the things you have to learn, right?
It's very obvious once you look at this
error, found it has a unknown type cuz
we haven't given it a concrete type yet,
found in i32 can't obviously you
cannot compare a reference to
a non reference that makes sense.
You have to compare
them at the same level.
So there we go.
We've compared them at the same level.
We'll look at that.
As you can see,
we can now filter out this value.
So if I had a foo, that will say value
11 and I did a dot filter on it, and
I returned it, it would return a nun, so
it actually keeps the same outer type.
And we can keep passing this thing around.
But the inner type,
the value would get removed because we
we don't want to deal with that case.
And so
these are like super cool constructs.
And at first this probably
feels a touch overwhelming, but
it's a pretty cool construct and
I'm going over these things just so
you have this kind of in your mind?
So I kind of went around all these
things that I forget any of them.
Yeah, there's also like unwrap, so
unwrapped just forces you
to get the value out.
But if there's no underlying value,
your program panics and terminates.
So unwraps kind of dangerous.
There's unwrap, or
where you can pass in the value,
the default value if you want it.
There's unwrap or else,
which sounds ominous, but all it is,
is that like say you have a value that
you wanna create that costs a lot, right?
Say you have a buffer that contains
a megabyte worth of data, or
you're gonna return a empty
megabyte worth of data.
Obviously you wouldn't want to keep on
creating that megabyte worth of data over
and over again, you'd only want that to
execute when there's nothing available.
And so that's why this obviously creates
it versus this will create it lazily.
Cheap to create closures,
expensive to create the underlying type.
You can also map them, we saw that.
So you can even see here I'm adding
five to it, pretty fantastic